---
layout: project
title: ICP
description: Implementation of the photogeometric ICP algorithm in OpenCL
date: 2015-06-17 00:00:00
categories: [ robotics, registration ]
tags: [ c++, opencl, icp, registration, filtering, nearest-neighbor, point-cloud ]
filename: 2015-06-17-icp
img: icp.gif
carousel: [ 1.gif ]
website: https://github.com/nlamprian/ICP
---

ICP is an implementation of the **Photogeometric Iterative Closest Point (ICP)** algorithm in OpenCL. **ICP** performs real-time frame-to-frame 3D registration, utilizing both the **geometry** and the **texture** of a scene. This way, the geometric features can guide the registration process in situations where there are faintly textured regions, and the color can be used in those places with non-salient surface topology. The implemented framework is based on the paper [Real-time RGB-D mapping and 3D modeling on the GPU using the random ball cover data structure](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/login.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6130381&url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fxpls%2Fabs_all.jsp%3Farnumber%3D6130381) by Neumann et al.

Currently, there are two options for the rotation estimation step. One that uses **rotation matrices** and estimates the rotation by performing **Singular Value Decomposition** on the `CPU`. The other uses **unit quaternions** and estimates the rotation based on the **Power Method**. The rest of the computational load is executed exclusively on the `GPU`. Both resulting pipelines are able to perform one **ICP iteration** in about `1.1 millisecond`, for input sets of `|F|=|M|=16384` landmarks and `|R|=256` representative points.

It's quite easy to do 3D registration in your own applications. You configure and initialize an `ICP` object, write the sets of landmarks on the device buffers, possibly offer an initial estimation of the transformation, execute the kernels, and get back the estimated homogeneous transformation. Below is a dummy example to showcase the workflow. For more details, take a look at the example in the repository.

{% highlight cpp linenos %}
#include <CLUtils.hpp>
#include <ICP/algorithms.hpp>

using namespace clutils;
using namespace cl_algo;

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
  // Setup OpenCL environment
  CLEnv env;
  env.addContext(0);
  env.addQueue(0, 0);
  env.addProgram(0, kernel_files_rbc);
  env.addProgram(1, kernel_files_icp);

  // Configure kernel execution parameters
  CLEnvInfo<1> infoRBC(0, 0, 0, { 0 }, 0);
  CLEnvInfo<1> infoICP(0, 0, 0, { 0 }, 1);
  const ICP::ICPStepConfigT RC = ICP::ICPStepConfigT::POWER_METHOD;
  const ICP::ICPStepConfigW WC = ICP::ICPStepConfigW::WEIGHTED;
  ICP::ICP<RC, WC> icp(env, infoRBC, infoICP);
  icp.init(nm, nr, a, c, max_iter, angle_thres, translation_thres);

  // Copy point clouds to device
  icp.write(ICP::ICPStep<RC, WC>::Memory::D_IN_F, dataF);
  icp.write(ICP::ICPStep<RC, WC>::Memory::D_IN_M, dataM);

  icp.buildRBC();  // Build RBC data structure
  icp.run();  // Refine transformation

  // Retrieve estimated transformation
  cl_float *T = (cl_float *) icp.read();

  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

You can find the complete **documentation** at [icp.nlamprian.me](http://icp.nlamprian.me/). The **source code** is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/nlamprian/ICP).
